# POSIX ACLs

## A refresher on idmappings

Before we dive into POSIX ACLs we should refresh our memory about idmappings and
comment on some of the notational convention this document will use.

In the context of the kernel an idmapping can be interpreted as mapping a range
of userspace ids into a range of kernel ids:

    userspace-id:kernel-id:range

Note that we are only concerned with idmappings as the kernel stores them not
how userspace would specify them.

A userspace id is always an element in the upper idmapset of an idmapping of
type `uid_t` or `gid_t` and a kernel id is always an element in the lower
idmapset of an idmapping of type `kuid_t` or `kgid_t`.

The kernel is mostly concerned with kernel ids. They are used when performing
permission checks and are stored in an inode's `i_uid` and `i_gid` field.

A userspace id on the other hand is an id that is reported to userspace by the
kernel, or is passed by userspace to the kernel, or a raw device id that is
written or read from disk. There's an argument to be made that userspace and raw
device ids are different but at least for the current type system the kernel
uses they are the same and expressed by `uid_t`/`gid_t` or simple integers.

For the rest of this document we will prefix all userspace ids with `u` and
all kernel ids with `k`. Ranges of idmappings will be prefixed with `r`. So
an idmapping will be written as `u0:k10000:r10000`.

Later we will encounter idmapped mounts which generate another type of id known
as `vfsuid_t` and `vfsgid_t`. We will write such idmappings as:

    k0:v10000:r10000

The `k` and `v` indicate that these idmappings translate between
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and generate `vfsuid_t`/`vfsgid_t`.


A kernel id is always created by an idmapping. Such idmappings are associated
with user namespaces. Since we mainly care about how idmappings work we're not
going to be concerned with how idmappings are created nor how they are used
outside of the filesystem context. This is best left to an explanation of user
namespaces.

The initial user namespace is special. It always has an idmapping of the
following form::

    u0:k0:r4294967295

which is an identity idmapping over the full range of ids available on this
system.

The functions `make_kuid()`/`make_kgid()` take a `uid_t`/`gid_t` and generate a
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t`:

    k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536, u4);

The functions `from_kuid()`/`from_kgid()` take a `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and generate
a `uid_t`/`gid_t`:

    u10000004 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536, k10000004);

Similarly, the `make_vfsuid()`/`make_vfsgid()` functions take `kuid_t`/`kgid_t`
and generate a `vfsuid_t`/`vfsgid_t`:

    v10000004 = make_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536, &init_user_ns, k4);

and the functions `from_vfsuid()`/`from_vfsgid()` take a `vfsuid_t`/`vfsgid_t`
and generate `kuid_t`/`kgid_t`:

    k4 = from_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536, &init_user_ns, v10000004);

The `make_*()` and `from_*()` functions invert each other.

## POSIX ACLs - The Status Quo

When creating or retrieving POSIX ACLs that store additional uids and gids via
`ACL_USER` or `ACL_GROUP` through the `setxattr()` and `getxattr()` system calls
various problems exist for stacked filesystems such as `overlayfs`.

But let's start with the seemingly simple status quo.

When running in a user namespace the uids and gids stored via `ACL_USER` and
`ACL_GROUP` attributes in POSIX ACLs need to be mapped into the caller's user
namespace. The caller's user namespace carries what we will refer to as the
"`caller_idmapping`" going forward.


This mapping or "translation" is performed by `posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`
for `setxattr()` and by `posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` for `getxattr()`.

The underlying helper called by `posix_acl_fix_xattr_{from,to}_user()` has a
pecular implemation that is important to understand in order to understand POSIX
ACLs with `ACL_USER` and `ACL_GROUP` attributes set:

(1) `posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`

    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536

    struct posix_acl_xattr_entry *entry;

    k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4 /* entry->e_id */);
    u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);

(2) `posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()`

    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536

    struct posix_acl_xattr_entry *entry;

    k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004 /* entry->e_id */);
    u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);

It is important to note that in (1) and (2) the `init_user_ns` is used
independent of whether or not the underlying filesystem that the POSIX ACLs were
retrieved from has been mounted inside of a user namespace and thus have a
filesystem idmapping ("`fs_idmapping`").

Why is that relevant you may ask. Usually, when writing uids and gids passed in
from userspace to the filesystem involves translating the raw `uid_t` and
`gid_t` into a `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` right at the userspace <-> VFS boundary.
Then they are kept as `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` right until the moment where they
need to be written to disk.

For example, consider a regular `chown()` call:

    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536

    chown(/some/file, u4, u4);

Right when entering the VFS the kernel will map the `uid_t` and `gid_t` values
passed in from userspace into a `kuid_t` and `kgid_t`:


    k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    k10000004 = make_kgid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, u4);

and store it in an appropriate kernel internal `struct iattr`. Once the inode is
changed and the change ultimately written back to disk the kernel will map the
`kuid_t` and `kgid_t` back into a `uid_t` and `gid_t` and write these values to
disk taking the `fs_idmapping` into account:

    u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    u4 = from_kgid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);

So right at the userspace <-> VFS boundary, the kernel will take care to map the
caller provided `uid_t` and `gid_t` into kernel internal `kuid_t` and `kgid_t`
representations. And the kernel will take care to never conflate `uid_t` and
`gid_t` values from there on. It will especially not translate them back into
`uid_t` and `gid_t` somewhere in the middle...

But for POSIX ACLs this isn't true. Going back to (1) we can see that the kernel
does indeed first translate the userspace `uid_t` and `gid_t` provided in
`ACL_USER` and `ACL_GROUP` attributes by mapping them via `make_kuid()` and
`make_kgid()` into `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` according to the `caller_idmapping``.

Suprisingly howerver, the `make_kuid()` and `make_kgid()` calls in (1) are
immediately followed by calls to `from_kuid()` and `from_kgid()` using the
`initial_idmapping` attached to `init_user_ns`.

And strangly all that this will achieve is an identity translation that turns
the `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` we just generated back into raw `uid_t` and `gid_t`
with the samve value as the `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` we just created. That seems
rather odd. Especially because we just noticed earlier that the kernel is
adamant about translating between userspace `uid_t` and `gid_t` into `kuid_t`
and `kgid_t` only at either the userspace <-> VFS or the VFS <-> backing store
boundary.

It contradicts the claim that we made earlier that the kernel will not translate
`kuid_t` and `kgid_t` into `uid_t` and `gid_t` somewhere in the middle of a
callchain. But we can see this weird behavior for POSIX ACLs all across the
callchains they are a part of.

The reason for this is simple and nasty. The VFS currently abuses the uapi
`struct posix_acl_xattr_entry` to transport `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` from the VFS
down to the filesystem and from the filesystem up to the VFS in the form of
userspace `uid_t` and `gid_t`. This has the consequence that the kernel
_intentionally_ breaks it's own type-safety requirements.

The only reason that the kernel uses the `initial_idmapping` in `from_kuid()`
and `from_kgid()` is to translate the just generated `kuid_t` and `kgid_t`s back
into `uid_t` and `gid_t` of the same value so that the target value can be
communicated to and from the filesystem without having to introduce an
additional kernel internal struct that would contain `kuid_t` and `kgid_t`
values and would perserve type safety. In other words, you're looking at a
classic hack instead of a proper redesign.

This has other consequences. For example, the callchains that POSIX ACLs are
involved in look extremely weird because the VFS _always_ uses the
`initial_idmapping` when translating between the uapi `struct
posix_acl_xattr_entry` and the kernel internal `struct posix_acl` __even if the
filesystem is mounted in a user namespace__ and thus would have an
`fs_idmapping` attached to it.

The cost of this is that it becomes very hard to understand what is going
especially when lacking proper documentation. It is extremely unclear why the
`fs_idmapping` is completely irrelevant even though the kernel translates between
`kuid_t` and `kgid_t` and `uid_t` and `gid_t` _multiple times_ in a standard
POSIX ACL callchain. This is bound to confuse developers and it is certain to
wreak havoc when bringing stacking filesystems like `overlayfs` into the mix.

## Before Linux v5.20

Let's look at a few POSIX ACL callchains before Linux v5.20 for various
filesystems. We will look at `xfs` and since the logic for `btrfs` and `ext4`
and various other filesystems is identical an `xfs` callchain can stand in for
all the other ones. None of the three filesystems can be mounted inside user
namespaces and so the only relevant `fs_idmapping` is the `initial_idmapping`.

But we will also look at `FUSE` which is the only filesystems that is mountable
inside of user namespaces while also being able to have a backing store.
Contrast this with `tmpfs` which is a filesystem that is mountable inside of
user namespace but has can never have a device backing it.

(3) `xfs`: `setxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295 /* xfs can only be mounted in the initial userns */

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
    10                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    11               }
    12          -> vfs_setxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    13             -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    14                -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    15                   -> __vfs_setxattr()
    16                      -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    17                         -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    18                            {
    19                                     k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    20                            }
    21                            -> set_posix_acl()
    22                               -> posix_acl_valid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    23                                  {
    24                                           true = kuid_has_mapping(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    25                                  }
    26                                  -> i_op->set_acl() == xfs_set_acl()
    27                                     {
    28                                             u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    29                                     }

(4) `xfs`: `getxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295 /* xfs can only be mounted in the initial userns */

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> get_acl()
     9                       -> i_op->get_acl() == xfs_get_acl()
    10                          {
    11                                  k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, u10000004);
    12                          }
    13                    -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    14                       {
    15                               u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    16                       }
    17           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    18              {
    19                       k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    21                       u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);
    22              }

(5) `FUSE` with `initial_idmapping`: `setxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
    10                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    11                }
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* FUSE */
    13              -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    14                 -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    15                    -> __vfs_setxattr()
    16                       -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    17                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    18                             {
    19                                      k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    20                             }
    21                             -> set_posix_acl()
    22                                -> posix_acl_valid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    23                                   {
    24                                            true = kuid_has_mapping(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    25                                   }
    26                                   -> i_op->set_acl() == fuse_set_acl()
    27                                      -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    28                                         {
    29                                                  u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    30                                         }

(6) `FUSE` with `initial_idmapping`: `getxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* FUSE */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> get_acl()
     9                       -> i_op->get_acl() == fuse_get_acl()
    10                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr(u0:k0:r4294967295 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    11                             {
    12                                  k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k0:r4294967295 /* fs_idmapping */, u10000004);
    13                             }
    14                    -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    15                       {
    16                               u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    17                       }
    18           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    19              {
    20                       k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    22                       u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);
    23              }

(7) `FUSE` with `fs_idmapping`: `setxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k10000000:r65536

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
    10                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    11                }
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* FUSE */
    13              -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    14                 -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    15                    -> __vfs_setxattr()
    16                       -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    17                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    18                             {
    19                                      k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    20                             }
    21                             -> set_posix_acl()
    22                                -> posix_acl_valid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    23                                   {
    24                                            true = kuid_has_mapping(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    25                                   }
    26                                   -> i_op->set_acl() == fuse_set_acl()
    27                                      -> posix_acl_to_xattr(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    28                                         {
    29                                                  u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    30                                         }

(8) `FUSE` with `fs_idmapping`: `getxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k10000000:r65536

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* FUSE */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> get_acl()
     9                       -> i_op->get_acl() == fuse_get_acl()
    10                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    11                             {
    12                                  k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    13                             }
    14                    -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    15                       {
    16                               u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    17                       }
    18           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    19              {
    20                       k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    22                       u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);
    23              }

(9) `overlayfs` with `initial_idmapping` on top of lower layer with `initial_idmapping`: `setxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295
    ovl_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
    10                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    11                }
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    13              -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    14                 -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    15                    -> __vfs_setxattr()
    16                       -> handler->set() == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_set()
    17                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr()
    18                             {
    19                                      k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004)
    20                             }
    21                          -> ovl_xattr_set()
    22                             -> override_creds()
    23                             -> ovl_do_setxattr()
    24                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    25                                   -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    26                                      -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    27                                         -> __vfs_setxattr()
    28                                            -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    29                                               -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    30                                                 {
    31                                                          k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    32                                                 }
    33                                                 -> set_posix_acl()
    34                                                    -> posix_acl_valid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    35                                                       {
    36                                                                true = kuid_has_mapping(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    37                                                       }
    38                                                       -> i_op->set_acl() == xfs_set_acl()
    39                                                          {
    40                                                                  u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    41                                                          }
    42                            -> revert_creds()

(10) `overlayfs` with `initial_idmapping` on top of lower layer with `initial_idmapping`: `getxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295
    ovl_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* overlayfs */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> ovl_xattr_get()
     9                       -> vfs_getxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    10                          -> __vfs_getxattr()
    11                             -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
    12                                -> get_acl()
    13                                   -> i_op->get_acl() == xfs_get_acl()
    14                                      {
    15                                              k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    16                                      }
    17                                -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    18                                   {
    19                                           u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k4);
    20                                   }
    21           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    22              {
    23                       k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u4);
    25                       u-1 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k4);
    26              }

(11) `overlayfs` with `fs_idmapping` on top of layer with `fs_idmapping`: `setxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k10000000:r65536
    ovl_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
    10                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    11                }
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    13              -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    14                 -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    15                    -> __vfs_setxattr()
    16                       -> handler->set() == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_set()
    17                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr()
    18                             {
    19                                      k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004)
    20                             }
    21                          -> ovl_xattr_set()
    22                             -> override_creds()
    23                             -> ovl_do_setxattr()
    24                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* FUSE */
    25                                   -> vfs_setxattr()
    26                                      -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    27                                         -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    28                                            -> __vfs_setxattr()
    29                                               -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    30                                                  -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    31                                                     {
    32                                                              k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    33                                                     }
    34                                                     -> set_posix_acl()
    35                                                        -> posix_acl_valid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    36                                                           {
    37                                                                    true = kuid_has_mapping(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    38                                                           }
    39                                                           -> i_op->set_acl() == fuse_set_acl()
    40                                                              -> posix_acl_to_xattr(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    41                                                                 {
    42                                                                          u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    43                                                                 }
    44                             -> revert_creds()

(12) `overlayfs` with `fs_idmapping` on top of layer with `fs_idmapping`: `getxattr()`

    mnt_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k10000000:r65536
    ovl_idmapping:    u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* overlayfs */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> ovl_xattr_get()
     9                       -> vfs_getxattr() /* FUSE */
    10                          -> __vfs_getxattr()
    11                             -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
    12                                -> get_acl()
    13                                   -> i_op->get_acl() == fuse_get_acl()
    14                                      -> posix_acl_from_xattr(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    15                                         {
    16                                              k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    17                                         }
    18                                -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    19                                   {
    20                                           u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k10000004);
    21                                   }
    22           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    23              {
    24                       k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    26                       u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);
    27              }

As we've said `xfs` and the others cannot be mounted with an idmapping and thus
the relevant `fs_idmapping` is the `initial_idmapping`. This has the
consequence that some implementation details are more difficult to spot.

For example, in the `setxattr()` callchain (3) line 28 and in the `getxattr()`
callchain (4) line 11 the `initial_idmapping` is used because `xfs` can only be
mounted in `init_user_ns`. But for other filesystems the `fs_idmapping` can be
different from the `initial_idmapping`.

If `FUSE` is mounted without an `fs_idmapping` the logic is identical to `xfs`.
If it is mounted with an `fs_idmapping` the logic is different on the filesystem
level where the `fs_idmapping` is taken into account in the `setxattr()`
callchain (7) line 29 and in the `getxattr()` callchain (8) line 12.

Note however, how even in the case where an `fs_idmapping` is used as in (5) and
(6) VFS callchains such as

    posix_acl_xattr_set()
    -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)

or

    posix_acl_xattr_get()
    -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)

__always__ use the `initial_idmapping` as can be seen in (7) line 19 and (8)
line 16.

For `setxattr()` we pointed out earlier that in
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()` the type system is subverted by turning a
`kuid_t` and `kgid_t` into a `uid_t` and `gid_t` sending what should be a
`kuid_t` and `kgid_t` down as `uid_t` and `gid_t`.

In the `setxattr()` callchain (7) line 19 we can see that in the call to
`posix_acl_from_xattr()` the subversion is reverted by abusing the
`initial_idmapping` again and turning the `uid_t` and `gid_t` into a `kuid_t`
and `kgid_t` again.

For `getxattr()` the type safety violation happens not at the userspace <-> VFS
boundary but at the backing store <-> VFS boundary. The `getxattr()` callchain
(8) line 16 abuses the `initial_idmapping` to turn a `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` into
a `uid_t` and `gid_t` so it can be stored in the uapi
`struct posix_acl_xattr_entry` and then sent back up to the VFS <-> userspace
boundary.

There should be no type conversion happening here. The conversion from backing
store <-> VFS already happened way earlier when the fs read the POSIX ACLs from
disk and converted raw `ACL_USER`/`ACL_GROUP` ids into `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and
stored them in `struct posix_acl`. But from that point on they should be kept in
a struct with `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` types until right at the VFS <-> userspace
boundary when they have to be converted from `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` to
`uid_t`/`gid_t` that can be reported to userspace.  Instead, the conversion
happens multiple times:

    xfs_get_acl(uid_t/gid_t -> kuid_t/kgid_t)
    posix_acl_from_xattr(kuid_t/kgid_t -> uid_t/gid_t)
    posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user(uid_t/gid_t -> kuid_t/kgid_t -> uid_t/gid_t)

when really it should be:

    xfs_get_acl(uid_t/gid_t -> kuid_t/kgid_t)
    posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user(kuid_t/kgid_t -> uid_t/gid_t)

As we can see the type system subversion is reverted again in
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` by abusing the `initial_idmapping` again to turn
the `uid_t` and `gid_t` back into a `kuid_t` and `kgid_t`. The `kuid_t` and
`kgid_t` just generated then immediately get mapped into `uid_t` and `gid_t` in
the `caller_idmapping` in order to report it to userspace.

This is a whole lot of subtlety and ripe for confusion and bugs.

## POSIX ACLs and overlayfs

On `overlayfs` the callchains become more complicated because `overlayfs` is a
stacking filesystems. What this means is that certain functions will be hit
twice in an `overlayfs` callchain.

For example, the VFS encapsulates some core filesystem functionality in helpers
prefixed with `vfs_` such as `vfs_setxattr()` or `vfs_getxattr()`. You can spot
those helpers in the callchains above.

A stacking filesystem such as `overlayfs` will need to call these helpers in
order to perform operations on the filesystem it is stacked upon. For example,
if you mount an `overlayfs` filesystem:

```
mount -t overlay overlay -o lowerdir=/lower_layer_1:lower_layer_2, \
                            upperdir=/writable_layer/upper,        \
                            workdir=/writable_layer/work           \
                            /merge
```

and have created a file `/merge/file`. When setting a POSIX ACL on this file via
`setxattr()` a nested or stacking callchain will be created. So blanking out all
distracting details of the `setxattr()` callchain from a callchain like (9) or
(11) above we get:

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2
     3
     4
     5
     6
     7
     8
    10
    11
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    13
    14
    15
    16
    17
    18
    19
    20
    21
    22
    23
    24                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* xfs or FUSE */

meaning that the `vfs_setxattr()` helper is called once for the `overlayfs`
layer and a second time for the underlying filesystem such as `xfs` or `FUSE`.

You can see that the subtle type confusions are evern more problematic now
because they have to be reasoned about in scenarios where two filesystems are
involved. That's not taking into account that the type confusion has to be kept
around for an even longer time and passed into even more complicated and deep
callchains.

This hack didn't matter or rather wasn't obvious at all for a long time until we
came a long and implemented a new feature.

## Idmapped Mounts

Idmapped mounts work by allowing to attach idmappings to mounts. You might have
noticed these idmappings above as `mnt_idmapping` on top of all the callchains
we lined out.

In essence, idmapped mounts function like a temporary and localized `chown()`
operation where the ownership changes are tied to the lifetime of a mount and in
contrast to `chown()` complex ownership mappings can be taken into account.

During permission checking and when creating new filesystem objects or reporting
ownership information the `mnt_idmapping` needs to be taken into account.

Say you have a file that is stored on the backing store as being owned by `u0`.
Now that filesystem is mounted in a user namespace with the `fs_idmapping`
`u0:k10000000:r65536`. When the filesystem initializes ` struct inode` for the
file and fills in ownership information via:

```c
static inline void i_uid_write(struct inode *inode, uid_t uid)
{
        inode->i_uid = make_kuid(i_user_ns(inode), uid);
}
```

this comes down to:

    k10000000 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* fs_idmapping */, u0);

and means the `struct inode` for the file will contain `k10000000` in
`inode->i_uid` and `inode->i_gid`.

Now when an idmapped mount is in the mix the `mnt_idmapping` needs to be taken
into account when ownership information is needed. This comes down to undoing
the `fs_idmapping` and applying the `mnt_idmapping` (The details around this are
documented in `Documentation/filesystems/idmappings.rst` in the Linux kernel
repository so I won't repeat it all here. I encourage you to read this
document.)

Currently no filesystems mountable inside of user namespaces support idmapped
mounts so our explanation becomes a little simpler since the `fs_idmapping` is
always the `initial_idmapping`.

Let's look at an idmapped mount created for an `xfs` filesystem. Since `xfs` can
only be mounted with the `initial_idmapping` the value stored as the ownership
of a file on the backing store is identical to the value stored in the
`inode->i_uid` and `inode->i_gid` in `struct inode`.

They are separate types of course, as the `inode->i_uid` and `inode->i_gid`
members have type `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` while the device ownership is expressed
in terms of `uid_t` and `gid_t`. In any case, for this example `inode->i_uid`
and `inode->i_gid` for the file will contain `k0`:

    k0 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, u0);

Now assume we have created an idmapped mount for some directory or the whole
filesystem with the idmapping `u0:k10000000:r65536`. This means that the kernel
will remap `inode->i_uid` and `inode->i_gid` on the fly during permission
checking. This logic is epressed in `make_vfsuid()` and `make_vfsgid()`:

    v10000000 = make_vfsuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k0)

and to reverse:

    k0 = from_vfsuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, v10000000)

The difference to `make_kuid()` and `make_kgid()` is that the input isn't
a `uid_t`/`gid_t` but a `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and the output is a
`vfsuid_t`/`vfsgid_t`. This is a dedicated type introduced to ensure that
a `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` can never be conflated with a `vfsuid_t`/`vfsgid_t`. In
other words, we ensure that a `mnt_idmapping` generates a new ownership type
that only ever appears in the VFS and can't be accidently passed to
`from_kuid()`/`from_kgid()` or `make_kuid()`/`make_kgid()`.

## Idmapped Mounts and POSIX ACLs

In order to support idmapped mounts all relevant callchains had to be updated to
take the `mnt_idmapping` into account. This includes all relevant POSIX ACL
codepaths.

So the translation helpers in (1) and (2) were adapated to:

(13) `posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`

    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    mnt_idmapping:    k0:v10000000:r65536

    struct posix_acl_xattr_entry *entry;

    k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4 /* entry->e_id */);

    v10000004 = make_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, k10000004);
           k4 = from_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536 /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, v10000004);

           u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k4);

(14) `posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()`

    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    mnt_idmapping:    k0:v10000000:r65536

    struct posix_acl_xattr_entry *entry;

           k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u4 /* entry->e_id */);

    v10000004 = make_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536 /*mnt_idmapping, &init_user_ns, k4);
    k10000004 = from_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, v10000004);

    u4 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);

The consequence of the earlier type confusion is that we need to play the same
game on idmapped mounts that we played earlier. We need to abuse the
`initial_idmapping` again to subvert the type system.

The first problem is that `make_vfsuid()`/`make_vfsgid()` and
`from_vfsuid()`/`from_vfsgid()` are conceptually tied to the `fs_idmapping`.

For example, `make_vfsuid()`/`make_vfsgid()` need to undo the `fs_idmapping` for
VFS objects such as `struct inode`'s `inode->i_uid` and `inode->i_gid` and then
apply the `mnt_idmapping`.

The `from_vfsuid()`/`from_vfsgid()` helpers are the inverse of
`make_vfsuid()`/`make_vfsgid()` and thus need to undo the `mnt_idmapping` before
applying the `fs_idmapping`.

The helpers elegantly express the dependency between the `fs_idmapping` and the
`mnt_idmapping` and thus suggest that the `fs_idmapping` be used whenever they
are called.

The problem now is that the type safety subversion in `ACL_USER`/`ACL_GROUP`
POSIX ACLs now becomes even more problematic. First, because the developer needs
to be aware that the `fs_idmapping` is completely irrelevant in
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`/`posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` and thus is
also irrelevant for `make_vfsuid()`/`make_vfsgid()` and
`from_vfsuid()`/`from_vfsgid()`. That itself is already a feat because the
developer needs to be aware of the callchain pecularities of POSIX ACLs. That
problem would not exist if the type passed down into or up from the filesystem
would stay a `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` right until the moment where we transition
between the VFS <-> userspace or backingstore <-> VFS boundary.

Second, the `mnt_idmapping` is a property of the VFS that is tied to a mount
created for a specific filesystem. So the `mnt_idmapping` cannot be taken into
account for `ACL_USER`/`ACL_GROUP` POSIX ACLs in some early place of a stacking
callchain that `overlayfs` generates. Since they are a property of each layer in
a filesystem stack generated by `overlayfs` they need to be taken into account
at specific places in the callchain.

So consider the callchain we abbreviated earlier to make the stacking of
`vfs_setxattr()` calls for `overlayfs` more obvious:

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2
     3
     4
     5
     6
     7
     8
    10
    11
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    13
    14
    15
    16
    17
    18
    19
    20
    21
    22
    23
    24                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* xfs or FUSE */

The interesting question is where the `mnt_idmapping` is currently applied:

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2
     3
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user() /* translation step */
     7
     8
    10
    11
    12           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    13
    14
    15
    16
    17
    18
    19
    20
    21
    22
    23
    24                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* xfs or FUSE */

We can see that the `mnt_idmapping` is applied outside of `vfs_setxattr()` in
`do_setxattr()`.

Let's assume we have a filesystem that has a POSIX ACL for `ACL_USER` set with
`u4` stored on the backing store and we create an idmapped mount with
`k0:v10000000:r65536` so that a caller with the `caller_idmapping`
`u0:k10000000:r65536` will see the POSIX ACL as being owned by `u4` when
retrieving it. Currently this does not work:

(15)

    mnt_idmapping:    k0:v10000000:r65536
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* overlayfs */
     6              -> __vfs_getxattr()
     7                 -> handler->get == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_get()
     8                    -> ovl_xattr_get()
     9                       -> vfs_getxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    10                          -> __vfs_getxattr()
    11                             -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
    12                                -> get_acl()
    13                                   -> i_op->get_acl() == xfs_get_acl()
    14                                      {
    15                                              k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    16                                      }
    17                                -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    18                                   {
    19                                           u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k4);
    20                                   }
    21           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    22              {
    23                       k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u4);
    24                       v4 = make_vfsuid(&init_user_ns /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, k4);
    25                       k4 = from_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, v4);
    26                       u-1 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k4);
    27              }

We can see in (15) line 26 that the translation yields `u-1` which just means
that the `caller_idmapping` doesn't contain a mapping for `k4`. And the reason
is that the `mnt_idmapping` never got taken into account which would have
ensured that `k10000004` would've been returned which does have a mapping in the
`caller_idmapping`.

The reason why the `mnt_idmapping` wasn't taken into account is that the the
translation happens only in the top layer of the filesystem stack. In other
words, the translation happens for the `overlayfs` filesystem but obviously the
`overlayfs` filesystem has not been on an idmapped mount (Side-note: In fact,
`overlayfs` can only be mounted _on top of_ idmapped mounts but it does not
support the creation of idmapped mount and probably never will.).

So the translation step involving the `mnt_idmapping` needs to happen in
`vfs_getxattr()`/`vfs_setxattr()` so that the VFS can take the `mnt_idmapping`
into account for each filesystem it is called upon.

Starting with Linux v5.20 this is exactly what will be done. Instead of
performing the `mnt_idmapping` translations in
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`/`posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` right in
`do_getxattr()`/`do_setxattr()` the `mnt_idmapping` is now taken into account in
`vfs_setxattr()`/`vfs_getxattr()`:

(16)

    mnt_idmapping:    k0:v10000000:r65536
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_setxattr()
     2 -> path_setxattr()
     3    -> setxattr()
     4       -> do_setxattr()
     5          -> setxattr_convert()
     6             -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()
     7                {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, u4);
     9                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    10                }
    11           -> vfs_setxattr() /* overlayfs */
    12              -> posix_acl_setxattr_idmapped_mnt()
    13                 {
    14                         k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    15                         v10000004 = make_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, k10000004);
    16                         k10000004 = from_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, v10000004);
    17                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    18                 }
    19              -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    20                 -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    21                    -> __vfs_setxattr()
    22                       -> handler->set() == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_set()
    23                          -> posix_acl_from_xattr()
    24                             {
    25                                      k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004)
    26                             }
    27                          -> ovl_xattr_set()
    28                             -> override_creds()
    29                             -> ovl_do_setxattr()
    30                                -> vfs_setxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    31                                   -> posix_acl_setxattr_idmapped_mnt()
    32                                      {
    33                                              k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    34                                              v10000004 = make_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, k10000004);
    35                                                     k4 = from_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536 /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, v10000004);
    36                                                     u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k4);
    37                                      }
    38                                   -> __vfs_setxattr_locked()
    39                                      -> __vfs_setxattr_noperm()
    40                                         -> __vfs_setxattr()
    41                                            -> handler->set() == posix_acl_xattr_set()
    42                                               -> posix_acl_from_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    43                                                 {
    44                                                          k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u4);
    45                                                 }
    46                                                 -> set_posix_acl()
    47                                                    -> posix_acl_valid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, ...)
    48                                                       {
    49                                                                true = kuid_has_mapping(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k4);
    50                                                       }
    51                                                       -> i_op->set_acl() == xfs_set_acl()
    52                                                          {
    53                                                                  u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k4);
    54                                                          }
    55                            -> revert_creds()

(17)

    mnt_idmapping:    k0:v10000000:r65536
    caller_idmapping: u0:k10000000:r65536
    fs_idmapping:     u0:k0:r4294967295

     1 sys_getxattr()
     2 -> path_getxattr()
     3    -> getxattr()
     4       -> do_getxattr()
     5           -> vfs_getxattr() /* overlayfs */
     6              -> posix_acl_getxattr_idmapped_mnt()
     7                 {
     8                         k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
     9                         v10000004 = make_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, k10000004);
    10                         k10000004 = from_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, v10000004);
    11                         u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    12                 }
    13              -> __vfs_getxattr()
    14                 -> handler->get == ovl_posix_acl_xattr_get()
    15                    -> ovl_xattr_get()
    16                       -> vfs_getxattr() /* btrfs/ext4/xfs */
    17                          -> __vfs_getxattr()
    18                             -> handler->get == posix_acl_xattr_get()
    19                                -> get_acl()
    20                                   -> i_op->get_acl() == xfs_get_acl()
    21                                      {
    22                                              k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, u4);
    23                                      }
    24                                -> posix_acl_to_xattr(&init_user_ns, ...)
    25                                   {
    26                                           u4 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns /* fs_idmapping */, k4);
    27                                   }
    28                          -> posix_acl_getxattr_idmapped_mnt()
    29                             {
    30                                     k4 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u4);
    31                                     v10000004 = make_vfsuid(k0:v10000000:r65536 /* mnt_idmapping */, &init_user_ns, k4);
    32                                     k10000004 = from_vfsuid(&init_user_ns, &init_user_ns, v10000004);
    33                                     u10000004 = from_kuid(&init_user_ns, k10000004);
    34                             }
    35           -> posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()
    36              {
    37                       k10000004 = make_kuid(&init_user_ns, u10000004);
    38                       u10000004 = from_kuid(u0:k10000000:r65536 /* caller_idmapping */, k10000004);
    39              }

A bug like this seems pretty obvious in hindsight but in fact it really isn't
when the type system is flouted. And looking closely you will see that this type
safety issue is haunting us even now as we constantly need to abuse the
`initial_idmapping` just for the sake of converting between the different types
and to be able to continue abusing the uapi `struct posix_acl_xattr_entry` to
pass `kuid_t` and `kgid_t` as `uid_t` and `gid_t` values.

## Confusing `fs_idmapping` relevance

A while ago we received a few questions about the role of the `fs_idmapping` for
POSIX ACLs as we were fixing the `overlayfs` POSIX ACL handling on top of
idmapped layers where we explained that the `mnt_idmapping` needs to be handled
in `vfs_getxattr()`/`vfs_setxattr()`.

The question was why
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`/`posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` couldn't just
be moved into `vfs_setxattr()`/`vfs_getxattr()` and simply taking the
`fs_idmapping` into account in these helpers.

This questions shows how dangerous the type subversion is. The fact is that the
`fs_idmapping` is __entirely irrelevant__ for
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`/`posix_acl_fix_xattr_to_user()` as we've seen.
The reason why it __seems__ relevant is that we convert between a
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and `uid_t`/`gid_t` but that conversion is entirely based on a
hack to pass `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` in a uapi `struct posix_acl_xattr_entry` as
`uid_t`/`gid_t`.

For a stacking filesystem the `fs_idmapping` of the top layer needs to be
transparent with respect to the ownership of things such as `inode->i_uid`,
`inode->i_gid`, `ACL_USER`/`ACL_GROUP` and POSIX ACLs and filesystem
capabilities.

The general idea is that right at the userspace <-> VFS boundary any
`uid_t`/`gid_t` passed in from userspace is immediately turned into a
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t`. The `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` is kept and only translated into a
`uid_t`/`gid_t` at the VFS <-> backing store boundary, i.e., when a write to a
backing store occurs. The same applies for the backing store <-> VFS boundary
where the `uid_t`/`gid_t` stored in the backing store needs to be turned into a
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t` and only ever converted back into `uid_t`/`gid_t` at the VFS
<-> userspace boundary.

A great example tol illustrate the point is a simple `chown()` operation. In
`chown_common()` the passed in `uid_t`/`gid_t` is turned into `kuid_t`/`kgid_t`
in the `caller_idmapping`. The `notify_change()` helper is then called to
determine whether the caller is allowed to perform the ownership change. Part of
that is validating via `kuid_has_mapping()`/`kgid_has_mapping()` that the
requested `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` has a mapping in the `fs_idmapping`. If it does we
know we can translate the `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` back into `uid_t`/`gid_t` when
writing to the backing store later on. But nowhere do we subvert the type
system by converting that `kuid_t`/`kgid_t` back into `uid_t`/`gid_t` let alone
storing it anwywhere to be operated on later.

For `overlayfs` the `chown()` operation is exactly similar just that permission
checking is performed twice as `notify_change()` is called once on the
`overlayfs` layer and once on the lower layer. But note that the requested
`kuid_t`/`kgid_t` never takes the `fs_idmapping` or `caller_idmapping` of the
mounter of the `overlayfs` filesystem into account.

Similarly, when we report ownership information of a file the lower layer will
fill in `struct kstat` with the ownership information based on the
`fs_idmapping` and `mnt_idmapping` of the relevant lower layer. But the
`fs_idmapping` and `caller_idmapping` of the `overlayfs` mounter are entirely
irrelevant for this.

This is very crucial to notice as taking the `fs_idmapping` or
`caller_idmapping` for `overlayfs` into account would mean that `overlayfs`
changes the ownership of the underlying filesystem objects when mounted inside
of a user namespace. That would be a pretty nasty security issue.

But this is exactly what moving
`posix_acl_fix_xattr_from_user()`/`posix_acl_fix_fix_xattr_to_user()` into
`vfs_getxattr()`/`vfs_setxattr()` would amount to. If these helpers were
relocated and would be changed to take the `fs_idmapping` into account then
POSIX ACL ownership would be changed by the `overlayfs` layer causing wrong
values for `ACL_USER`/`ACL_GROUP` to be stored in the backing store of the
underlying filesystem.
